northstar
====
## 5.25" hard sectored
<!-- This file is automatically generated. Do not edit. -->

Northstar Floppy disks use 10-sector hard sectored disks with either FM or MFM
encoding.  They may be single- or double-sided.  Each of the 10 sectors contains
256 (FM) or 512 (MFM) bytes of data.  The disk has 35 cylinders, with tracks 0-
34 on side 0, and tracks 35-69 on side 1.  Tracks on side 1 are numbered "back-
wards" in that track 35 corresponds to cylinder 34, side 1, and track 69
corresponds to cylinder 0, side 1.

The Northstar sector format does not include any head positioning information.
As such, reads from Northstar floppies need to by synchronized with the index
pulse, in order to properly identify the sector being read.  This is handled
automatically by FluxEngine.

Due to the nature of the track ordering on side 1, an .nsi image reader and
writer are provided for double-sided disks.  The .nsi image writer supports
both single- and double-sided disks; however single-sided .nsi images are
equivalent to .img images.

## Options

  - Format variants:
      - `87`: 87.5kB 5.25" 35-track SSSD hard-sectored
      - `175`: 175kB 5.25" 40-track SSDD hard-sectored
      - `350`: 350kB 5.25" 40-track DSDD hard-sectored

## Examples

To read:

  - `fluxengine read northstar --87 -s drive:0 -o northstar.nsi`
  - `fluxengine read northstar --175 -s drive:0 -o northstar.nsi`
  - `fluxengine read northstar --350 -s drive:0 -o northstar.nsi`

To write:

  - `fluxengine write northstar --87 -d drive:0 -i northstar.nsi`
  - `fluxengine write northstar --175 -d drive:0 -i northstar.nsi`
  - `fluxengine write northstar --350 -d drive:0 -i northstar.nsi`

## References

  - [MICRO-DISK SYSTEM MDS-A-D DOUBLE DENSITY Manual][northstar_mds].
    Page 33 documents sector format for single- and double-density.

[northstar_mds]: http://bitsavers.org/pdf/northstar/boards/Northstar_MDS-A-D_1978.pdf

